My name's David O'Rourke.
I have the privilege today of presenting
the directory architecture that Apple's
pursuing for its future development.
A little later,
Michael Dasenbrock will join me
on stage to talk about something
we didn't talk about last year.
The presentation today is going to cover
what are the Directory Services APIs,
why should you care, why does Apple care.
We're going to go into how Apple's
using the Directory Services APIs.
We're going to give an overview
of how to write a plug-in.
This is one of the key aspects of
Directory Services APIs that we
mostly hand-waved about last year.
So this year we're going
to give you some details.
And then we'll have a Q&A and answer
any questions that you may have.
The concept of Directory APIs is
we've heard feedback for years
from Apple that customers want to
take an Apple box out of the box,
plop it down, and point it at an existing
users and groups database,
and not have to import or export
their data from an existing database
and maintain separate databases.
So this concept fits in with
Apple's policy of simplifying,
in that the users don't have
to set up a separate database.
And so the concept:
just allow Apple services
to use customer data.
So Apple's Mac OS X system
software will be based on a
common directory architecture API.
This common directory architecture
will allow all Apple system software,
the desktop and the server,
to access directory services
via plug-in architecture.
So the architecture is
relatively straightforward.
We have a directory access
API layer that Apple provides.
And we're providing
some plug-ins ourselves.
This is important because we're
using our own plug-in architecture
to deliver directory access.
So we know this can be done.
This is not something we're
doing special case and then
telling you guys to do plug-ins.
We are providing an
Apple NetInfo plug-in,
which is Apple's directory
service of choice.
We're also providing an LDAP plug-in.
That's V2,
for those of you that want to know,
we might do V3 in the future.
And one of the developer opportunities,
as well as being on the top
with the developer solution
on top of the directory APIs,
is for developers to provide
plug-ins to other directories that
Apple hasn't chosen to write for.
That would include Novell.
That would include LDAP V3.
Any directory that you want,
possibly an Oracle database.
Some corporations run a proprietary
database as their back end.
The API runtime is
fairly straightforward.
A Directory API client makes an API call.
The APIs dispatch that as
a Mach IPC request down to
the Directory Access API.
The Directory Access API looks
at the request,
determines what plug-in is best
suited to handle the request,
dispatches it to the plug-in.
The plug-in performs magic.
It accesses a local file,
it goes out on the network.
The plug-ins have full access
to the entire Mac OS X operating
system at that point.
They satisfy the reply, return status,
and return the results up to the client.
The Directory Services Configuration is
another part of the Directory Services.
Clearly, clients need a way to enable and
disable various directory plug-ins.
So,
a la the extension manager for Mac OS 9,
we're going to have a
Mac OS X preference,
which will allow users to turn
Directory Services on and off.
The other thing this will do is,
if you've written a plug-in,
this will be the way customers will
access your custom configuration.
We'll have a configure button or
some menu option or something like
that that the users will click on.
You'll turn control over to your
code to put up an HI or do whatever's
necessary to configure your plug-in.
The Directory Access APIs have been
included in Functionals since DP3.
They are on DP4.
They are in
/system/library/framework/directory
service.
The API manifests itself
in five public C headers:
directoryservices.h,
directoryservicesconst.h,
directoryservicescustom.h,
and you can read the rest.
If you link with those header files,
you have access to the client APIs.
The plugin API will be made
available as an SDK shortly,
but also for anybody adopting the
directory APIs to do a plugin will
certainly give you an early seed.
The SDK just wasn't quite
ready at the time of DP4.
But both the client and the
plugin API will be part of
the final release of Mac OS X.
So there will be no SDK or no
additional installation if you want to
install a plugin on top of Mac OS X.
The APIs offer full support for read,
write, and discovery of data
in a directory service.
Read, for example,
would be find me a record
named David of type user.
Write would be update
David's phone number.
Discovery would be list all the
records present in this directory.
The API also offers the ability to
publish custom authentication methods.
We have defined some standard
authentication methods,
but you can extend the API and offer
new and never before implemented
authentication mechanisms.
And this also allows clients to discover
these authentication mechanisms.
That's the next bullet.
The API allows capabilities
for discovering of what the
directory plug-ins are offering.
The directory APIs are standard
C API and available from BSD,
Carbon, and Cocoa on Mac OS X.
So really,
we're running more to Core OS level.
We're not Carbon, we're not Cocoa,
we're more down near
the file system layer,
the networking API layer.
So there's really no runtime issues.
And you should be able to access
these APIs from pretty much anywhere.
any runtime environment on top of 10.
The API presents an abstraction model.
The first and most important part
of the abstraction model is nodes.
I thought of nodes two years
ago when we were beginning the
early design of this product.
Probably a better name
would have been scope.
But really this allows a plug-in
to restrict its damage or
how much data it's accessing.
The nodes are published by the
plug-ins and the directory service
represents a collection of plug-ins.
Plug-ins can register zero or more nodes.
It's even up to the plug-ins as to
what the semantics of the nodes are.
The nodes are one-to-one mapping to
the foreign system or if one node
represents an entire directory which is
actually hierarchical on the back end.
It's up to the plug-in to
interpret the scope of the nodes.
Nodes contain records.
Records reside in a directory node.
They consist of at least one name and
at least there is a keyword because
records can have multiple names.
I'm known as David O'Rourke.
I'm known as Dave O.
I'm known as David M.
O'Rourke.
We want the directory API to be able
to accommodate the notion of multiple
names mapping to the same record.
And at most one type.
Types of records are examples of users,
groups, printers, servers,
whatever you want for a type of record.
So you have the notion of name and
you have the notion of category to
deal with with record name and type.
Records contain attributes and values.
Attribute types would be
an example of unique ID,
names, phone number,
social security number.
And then attribute types contain values.
So an attribute like social
security number would be
a single-valued attribute,
whereas an attribute like phone
number would be multi-valued.
You have work, home, fax,
those sorts of examples.
The API accommodates that sort
of flexibility inside the system.
Values come from attributes,
and they're contained
within attribute types.
Values are blobs of data.
The Directory Service is data agnostic.
So the data is formatted in whatever
way the foreign system formats it,
or whatever way the attribute type
dictates it should be formatted.
The Directory Service does no policy
implementation in that particular area.
Apple's adoption.
This is very important.
We're not telling you to do this
and adopt it for yourself and then
going off and doing your own thing.
Our server software as well as
our desktop software will be
based on the directory APIs.
The administration software for Apple's
server software is directory API-based.
And the Apple's server software
products are already entirely based
on the directory service APIs.
So those of you fortunate enough to
perhaps participate in some early seeds
of server software have already used
software on directory service APIs.
Third-party enhancements or
replacements of services can
leverage Apple's work in this area.
This means you don't need to provide your
own administration tool to create a user.
You can simply add an attribute
to a user but use Apple's tools to
set up and populate the directory.
You don't have to provide the
full administration suite.
You could.
We're not saying you shouldn't.
We're just saying you don't have to know,
you no longer have to deliver
the complete solution because you
can leverage Apple's software.
Thank you.
that we're going to be doing
using the directory APIs.
Apple software products will be
configurable as to what nodes are used.
What does that statement mean?
That's the briefest I could get.
First of all, Apple software will request
standard record types which are
documented as part of the API.
So we will request KDS standard
user or KDS standard printer record.
This will enable directory node
plug-ins to map our standard
requests onto their foreign system.
The next thing
we do is customers can configure
directory access via the search node.
One of our plug-ins is a search node,
and this -- I could have an
hour-long conversation just on this.
But in essence,
the search node allows the
customer to choose which directory
nodes the services are gonna use.
So the idea is that if you've
added a directory for XYZ,
you can go to the search
node configuration panel,
and you can say,
"I wanna use active directory.
I wanna then consult net info,
and then I wanna consult LDAP in that
order wherever anybody wants to find
a record." Administrators can use the
search node to control data access,
access controls,
as well as bring new directories online.
API plugin usage and development.
We've developed three basic plugins.
We've developed a plugin for
Apple's own directory service,
NetInfo.
Now, this really gives you a
dual API to use on Mac OS X.
You can either use the native
NetInfo APIs to access NetInfo,
or you can use the directory APIs.
If you use the directory APIs,
you're insulated from us changing
directory service access.
If you use the NetInfo APIs,
they work with NetInfo.
We've developed an LDAP plugin,
so you can access any LDAP v2 system,
and we've developed a
search policy plugin.
And that's what implements the
system's policy about how it
goes about finding user records,
finding group records,
and so on and so forth.
Apple software products are being
tested with these three plugins.
If you have a plugin you
want us to test with,
you need to contact us.
But if you can make your plugin behave
like any one of these three plugins,
you're very close to being able to
have your plugin be able to work with
any Apple software out of the box.
The Apple desktop and server
software uses this architecture to
provide customers directory choice.
That's the whole point,
and that goes back to slide number one.
We are actively looking for
developers to develop a plug-in.
We are not going to do plug-ins to every
single directory system on the planet.
If you have a custom directory
you'd like to access,
we encourage you to contact
us to develop a plug-in.
If you have a standard directory
you want to develop access to,
there's a product opportunity
there for you to sell the
product to Apple customers.
At this point in time,
I'm going to stray from what we covered
last year in last year's session,
and we're going to give you some details
on how actually to write a plug-in.
And I'd like to invite Michael Dasenbrock
up on stage at this time,
and I'll be back later.
Thank you, David.
My name is Michael Dasenbrock.
I am the lead engineer on Apple's
Directory Service project.
And what I'm going to go over today
is I'm going to talk about how to
build a directory service plug-in.
Basically,
I'm going to give you a high-level
overview of the plug-in itself,
its structure, some of the entry points,
and the callback mechanisms
that are in each plug-in.
Okay, first of all, what are plug-ins?
Plug-ins are code-loadable
modules that use Apple's core
foundations CF load function.
They have seven different entry points,
which are listed here.
And they also have a series of callbacks,
which we'll get into more detail later.
Okay, where do you load a plug-in from?
Right now there's two standard locations
for loading directory plug-ins.
We do this for two reasons.
We allow you to load into the
system path or into the local path.
The system path is somewhat sacred and
you generally don't want to be modifying
that while you're doing development.
Also, it may be a read-only copy of
the OS and you may not be able
to modify that particular path.
So, you load from the local path
to allow you to develop that.
You can blow it away when you're done
and you won't be harming the system.
Each plug-in that you develop requires
that it has a DS plug extension
on it to get loaded by the server.
Here's an example structure of
what the Directory Service plug-in
is going to look like,
or the one that you're going to write.
As I stated before, it's loaded in one of
the two directory paths.
And as you can see here,
what's going to be inside that is going
to be your plug-in with a .dsp extension.
Inside that is your plug-in.
It's basically your executable,
the one that you're going to write.
So that's what gets loaded
by the directory server.
Also inside there is a resources folder.
Inside this resources folder
is a required property list.
I'll get into more detail about
what's going to be in that.
As well as any additional information
that you may want for your plug-in.
Say, for example,
you want some configuration information
or runtime files that you need to have.
It's guaranteed to go
along with your plug-in.
That's a great place to put them.
Okay, now here's that property list
that I was talking about earlier.
The items that you see
in blue are the keys.
Those are required and they
need to be in each field.
And as you can see,
you can see that in the green,
those are the items that
you're going to provide.
And the reason why I brought this
slide up is the one issue that's
going to be most particular to those
plug-in developers is the plug-in UUID.
That UUID needs to be unique
to your plug-in on the
system that it's loaded to.
If there's a conflict during load time,
the plug-in will not get loaded and
the first one with the same UUID is
loaded and the other one is not.
There will be ways to detect this
and I'll get into that later.
There will also be on the
SDK that's to be provided
later tools to generate a UUID.
Okay, how to make a directory plug-in.
First of all,
the best place to start is to start
with the sample source code that we're
going to provide on the upcoming SDK.
You can build and install this plug-in.
Once you've built this
plug-in and installed it,
it gives you an idea of how to take
-- you can look at the entry points.
You can look at the callback mechanisms.
This is a working plug-in.
It does nothing more than stub out all
of the calls that you're going to be
expected to process from client data,
as well as it registers a single node.
After you've got your plug-in built,
you're going to want to test it.
Testing it is also going to be through
some tools that we're going to provide.
We have, we're going to provide a test
app on the developer SDK.
You again install it in the
locations that I spoke about earlier.
To load your plugin you need to
first stop the directory server
and then relaunch it because the
plugins are loaded at launch time.
Right now they're not loadable on demand.
That may change in the future.
We haven't decided yet.
And then you can verify that your plugin
is loaded by looking into the log file.
Okay, again,
you can compile and build a directory
service API test client that we have.
It will allow you to do two things.
It will allow you to test your plugin
as well as give you an idea of what
clients are going to be requesting
from your plugin so that you can
get an idea of how to write your
plugin to service request for data.
And it gives you, again,
ideas how to use callbacks.
Okay, here are the-- we'll talk
a little bit about this.
We'll talk a little bit now about the
seven entry points into your plugin.
First one is validate.
Validate is called once at load time.
It's basically kind of a handshaking.
Are you who you say you are?
Are you the kind of
plugin I'm looking for?
Okay, I'm going to load you.
After all of the plugins
have been loaded,
your plugin then gets
called with initialize.
This is now the time for you to
go and do any startup information
or startup routines that you need
like open up networking ports,
open up a database file,
spawn off threads,
I'm not going to be able to do it.
Once initialization has
been successfully completed,
then plug-in state gets set to active,
and that gets done through
the set plug-in state call.
Administrators can take plug-ins
on and offline through the
Directory Services control panel.
And when they are taken
offline or online,
it comes through this set plug-in state.
And that allows you to either,
once you've been made active,
to again bring things online
that were performally offline,
and again take things offline
once you become inactive.
Process request.
This is where all the
heavy lifting gets done.
Your plug-in is going to probably
do 99% of its data handling
through this particular call.
This is where you're going to handle,
again, all of the lookup information
and all of the GET and SAT.
Shutdown.
This is called just before
Directory Services Server Shutdown.
Gives your plug-in a chance to clean up,
close some files,
shut down some network connections.
Configure, we allow all the plug-ins
to configure themselves.
Again,
we don't know what you're going to write.
We don't know anything
about your plug-in.
What happens is,
in the directory services control panel,
the administrator can select your plug-in
and click on the configure button.
The server then contacts your
plug-in through this API,
or this entry point,
and then it's up to you.
You can configure your
app in any way you want.
You can simply read a simple XML file,
or you can launch an elaborate
application with a great HI.
And then periodic task,
for those of you who don't
want to manage threads,
you just want a simple process
that gets called when you get
called through the entry points,
that's great,
we'll also call you periodically
to do some housekeeping,
and this guarantees that
you'll get some processor time.
Okay, now here's those callbacks that
I was talking about before.
Right now we have four callbacks.
What the plug-ins need to do is
they need to register the plug-in.
So they register their nodes,
making their nodes or their domains
available to the directory server,
as well as taking them offline
when they've been made inactive,
because they will no
longer be able to accept,
or they will no longer be
given any processing requests
as long as they're inactive.
So this allows the node to
bring them on and offline.
Unregister all is convenience called
will allow you to take them all offline
without having to do them individually.
And then there's a log-in callback,
which you can put in
debugging information.
As well as run time information
into the directory service log.
Okay, just a word to the wise.
Remember that your plug-ins
are going to be loaded by
the directory service server.
The directory service server
is running as a root process.
Therefore, your plug-in is going to be
running as a root process.
So you should do all
your development as root,
and then test as non-root.
So you know that it's
doing the right thing.
It's not giving non-root owners
root access and doing bad things
in the system that you normally
wouldn't do as a non-root owner.
Right now,
I believe the Directory Services is
locked down to read
only by administrator,
or read everyone,
but write only by administrator.
I believe that will be
the same with Pulse DP4.
Okay, to sum up,
what you need to do next is
contact your WDR representative
if you're interested in doing any
directory service development.
Please come and talk to us after
so we can hopefully get you,
we can get you on the contact list
for early seeds of the SDK as well
as get the copies of the directory
service documentation as well
as the plugin API documentation.
And with that,
I'll turn it back to David.
- The directory services
and other Apple technology,
the directory services are really
a low-level access technology,
they don't necessarily dictate an H.I.
or browser or anything like that.
So we complement some
other Apple technologies.
We provide a common framework
for higher-level software to be
insulated from the particulars of
a particular directory service.
One technology that we do complement
is Network Service Location,
which does have a directory
service plug-in under development.
So if you do a directory service plug-in,
NSL will be able to browse
your directory service via
its directory service plug-in.
So now you don't have to do two plug-ins,
one for NSL and one
for directory services.
Doing it in one place,
the whole system benefits.
What are the opportunities
for you as developers,
because we're all here to make money?
[Transcript missing]
What are some additional resources?
We have the
Apple Developer Developer Connection.
We're going to have our PDFs up there.
We have documentation for the API,
and we have documentation
for the plug-in.
We'll be posting those PDFs
to Apple Developer Resources.
Michael, is the API documentation in
the Frameworks subdirectory?
It will be in future builds or in
wherever documentation goes in Mac OS X.
Directory Service API documentation
will be available at the
Apple Developer Web site and the API and
the headers are installed with DP4.
You have the
Directory Service Client API.
You had it in DP3 if you didn't know it,
and you currently have it in DP4.
So if you want to play with it,
give us some feedback,
tell us about some bugs.
We'd love to see anyone playing
with the Directory Client API.
Who would you contact if
you're interested in developing
and need Apple's assistance?
Thomas Weier is your friend
in this particular case.
So contact Tom, pester him,
tell him that you need
access to Davo or Michael,
and that you desperately want to develop
the world's next greatest plug-in,
and you need David's time now.
And we'll be happy to work with you.